Demos/DatAgora_PartDieu/Readme.md, before:

A UD-Viz demo of 3DTiles based buildings and several urban data layers.
It was developed for a project about [the place of vegetation in cities](https://github.com/VCityTeam/DatAgora/wiki/Vegetalization-Project) by DatAgora

To setup your demo, you need to launch a terminal in this repository and run enter the following command :
```
docker-compose up
```
The setup will take several minutes. Once the geoserver is successfully launched and setup, you can try to connect to http://localhost:8080/geoserver (8080 being the GEOSERVER_PORT configured in the .env file, set to 8080 by default)
The UD-viz page should also be accessible at http://localhost:8999 (8999 being this time the UD_VIZ_PORT configured in the .env file, 8999 by default)

There are several variables you can customize in the .env file if needed :


 * GEOSERVER_PORT : the port used to access the geoserver (8080 by default)
 * GEOSERVER_ADMIN_USER : the admin username used to connect to the geoserver ("admin" by default)
 * GEOSERVER_ADMIN_PASSWORD : the admin password used to connect to the geoserver ("geoserver" by default)

 * GEOSERVER_MAX_CONNECTION_ATTEMPTS : number of attempts to try and connect to the geoserver for the setup container (10 by default)
 * GEOSERVER_TIME_CONNECTION_ATTEMPTS : number of seconds to between connection attempts to the geoserver for the setup container (5 by default)

 * UD_VIZ_PORT :  the port used to access the ud-viz demo (8999 by default)

Commit message:

Linting and documentation improvements
 * docker-compose .env file documentation moved from main
   Readme.md file
 * python_setup.py now PEP8 compliant (includes file renaming)
 * Linting python code located in server-setup-context/ now documented

Demos/DatAgora_PartDieu/Readme.md, after:

## What this demo is about
A demo illustrating how to:
  - serve an [UD-Viz based](https://github.com/VCityTeam/UD-Viz) urban scene 
  - uploading several urban data files to 
    [geoserver](https://github.com/kartoza/docker-geoserver)
  - serving the corresponding urban data layers (with the same geoserver) for
    display in the urban scene  
  - additional display of building sets based on the 3DTiles format

This demo was developed for the 
[place of vegetation in cities project](https://github.com/VCityTeam/DatAgora/wiki/Vegetalization-Project)
within DatAgora.

## Running the demo
The only pre-requisite is to have a host with 
[docker compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) installed.

In order to launching the demo (from a terminal) clone this repository and
change the directory to be the one holding this Readme.md file and run the
following command :
```
docker-compose up
```

The setup building of images might take up to several minutes. Once the 
docker-compose is running the container, you can:
 - access the web-gl based demo by browsing the `http://localhost:8999` URL
 - optionally access to the geoserver web interface by browsing the 
  `http://localhost:8080/geoserver` URL
  
The above ports (the integer numbers present in the URL) are configurable by
editing the 
[docker-compose .env file](https://docs.docker.com/compose/env-file/)
present in the [same directory](.env). Refer to the comments within that file
for a documentation of the roles of the respective variables.
